README.md, before:

# KubeVela Workflow

[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/kubevela/workflow)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/kubevela/workflow)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/kubevela/workflow/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/kubevela/workflow)
[![LICENSE](https://img.shields.io/github/license/kubevela/workflow.svg?style=flat-square)](/LICENSE)
[![Total alerts](https://img.shields.io/lgtm/alerts/g/kubevela/workflow.svg?logo=lgtm&logoWidth=18)](https://lgtm.com/projects/g/kubevela/workflow/alerts/)


## What is KubeVela Workflow

KubeVela Workflow is an open-source cloud-native workflow project that can use to orchestrate CI/CD process, terraform resources, multi-kubernetes-clusters management and even your own functional calls.

You can [install](#installation) KubeVela Workflow and use it, or import the code as an [sdk](#how-can-kubevela-workflow-be-used) of an IaC-based workflow engine in your own repository.

*The main differences between KubeVela Workflow and other cloud-native workflows are*:

All the steps in the workflow is based on IaC(Cue): every step has a `type` for abstract and reuse, the `step-type` is programmed in [CUE](https://cuelang.org/) language and easy to customize. 

That is to say, **you can use atomic capabilities like a function call in every step, instead of just creating a pod.**

## Why use KubeVela Workflow

<h1 align="center"><a href="https://kubevela.io/docs/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun"><img src="https://static.kubevela.net/images/1.6/workflow-arch.png" alt="workflow arch" align="center" width="700px" /></a></h1>

🌬️ **Lightweight Workflow Engine**: KubeVela Workflow won't create a pod or job for process control. Instead, everything can be done in steps and there will be no redundant resource consumption.

✨ **Flexible, Extensible and Programmable**: Every step has a type, and all the types are based on the [CUE](https://cuelang.org/) language, which means if you want to customize a new step type, you just need to write CUE codes and no need to compile or build anything, KubeVela Workflow will evaluate these codes.

💪 **Rich built-in capabilities**: You can control the process with conditional judgement, inputs/outputs, timeout, etc. You can also use the built-in step types to do some common tasks, such as `deploy resources`, `suspend`, `notification`, `step-group` and more!

🔐 **Safe execution with schema checksum checking**: Every step will be checked with the schema, which means you can't run a step with a wrong parameter. This will ensure the safety of the workflow execution.

## Try KubeVela Workflow

Run your first WorkflowRun to distribute secrets, build and push your image, and apply the resources in the cluster! Image build can take some time, you can use `vela workflow logs build-push-image --step build-push` to check the logs of building.

```
apiVersion: core.oam.dev/v1alpha1
kind: WorkflowRun
metadata:
  name: build-push-image
  namespace: default
spec:
  workflowSpec:
   steps:
   # or use kubectl create secret generic git-token --from-literal='GIT_TOKEN=<your-token>'
    - name: create-git-secret
      type: export2secret
      properties:
        secretName: git-secret
        data:
          token: <git token>
    # or use kubectl create secret docker-registry docker-regcred \
    # --docker-server=https://index.docker.io/v1/ \
    # --docker-username=<your-username> \
    # --docker-password=<your-password> 
    - name: create-image-secret
      type: export2secret
      properties:
        secretName: image-secret
        kind: docker-registry
        dockerRegistry:
          username: <docker username>
          password: <docker password>
    - name: build-push
      type: build-push-image
      properties:
        # use your kaniko executor image like below, if not set, it will use default image oamdev/kaniko-executor:v1.9.1
        # kanikoExecutor: gcr.io/kaniko-project/executor:latest
        # you can use context with git and branch or directly specify the context, please refer to https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/kaniko#kaniko-build-contexts
        context:
          git: github.com/FogDong/simple-web-demo
          branch: main
        image: fogdong/simple-web-demo:v1
        # specify your dockerfile, if not set, it will use default dockerfile ./Dockerfile
        # dockerfile: ./Dockerfile
        credentials:
          image:
            name: image-secret
        # buildArgs:
        #   - key="value"
        # platform: linux/arm
    - name: apply-deploy
      type: apply-deployment
      properties:
        image: fogdong/simple-web-demo:v1
```

## Quick Start

After installation, you can either run a WorkflowRun directly or from a Workflow Template. Every step in the workflow should have a type and some parameters, in which defines how this step works. You can use the [built-in step type definitions](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/workflow/built-in-workflow-defs) or [write your own custom step types](#how-to-write-custom-steps).

> Please checkout the [WorkflowRun Specification](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#workflowrun) and [WorkflowRun Status](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#status) for more details.

### Run a WorkflowRun directly

For more, please refer to the following examples:

- [Control the delivery process of multiple resources(e.g. your Applications)](./examples/multiple-apps.md)
- [Request a specified URL and then use the response as a message to notify](./examples/request-and-notify.md)
- [Automatically initialize the environment with terraform](./examples/initialize-env.md)

### Run a WorkflowRun from a Workflow Template

Please refer to the following examples:

- [Run the Workflow Template with different context to control the process](./examples/run-with-template.md)

## Installation

### Install Workflow

#### Helm

```shell
helm repo add kubevela https://kubevela.github.io/charts
helm repo update
helm install --create-namespace -n vela-system vela-workflow kubevela/vela-workflow
```

#### KubeVela Addon

If you have installed KubeVela, you can install Workflow with the KubeVela Addon:

```shell
vela addon enable vela-workflow
```

### Install Vela CLI(Optional)

Please checkout: [Install Vela CLI](https://kubevela.io/docs/installation/kubernetes#install-vela-cli)

## Features

- [Operate WorkflowRun](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#operate-workflowrun)
- [Suspend and Resume](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#suspend-and-resume)
- [Sub Steps](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#sub-steps)
- [Dependency](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#dependency)
- [Data Passing](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#data-passing)
- [Timeout](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#timeout)
- [If Conditions](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#if-conditions)
- [Custom Context Data](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#custom-context-data)
- [Built-in Context Data](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#built-in-context-data)

## Step Types

### Built-in Step Types

Please checkout the [built-in step definitions](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/workflow/built-in-workflow-defs) with scope that valid in `WorkflowRun`.
### Write Your Custom Step Types

If you're not familiar with CUE, please checkout the [CUE documentation](https://kubevela.io/docs/platform-engineers/cue/basic) first.

You can customize your steps with CUE and some [built-in operations](https://kubevela.io/docs/platform-engineers/workflow/cue-actions). Please checkout the [tutorial](https://kubevela.io/docs/platform-engineers/workflow/workflow) for more details.

> Note that you cannot use the [application operations](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/platform-engineers/workflow/cue-actions#application-operations) since there're no application data like components/traits/policy in the WorkflowRun.

## How can KubeVela Workflow be used

During the evolution of the [OAM](https://oam.dev/) and [KubeVela project](https://github.com/kubevela/kubevela), **workflow**, as an important part to control the delivery process, has gradually matured. Therefore, we separated the workflow code from the KubeVela repository to make it standalone. As a general workflow engine, it can be used directly or as an SDK by other projects.

### As a standalone workflow engine

Unlike the workflow in the KubeVela Application, this workflow will only be executed once, and will **not keep reconciliation**, **no garbage collection** when the workflow object deleted or updated. You can use it for **one-time** operations like:

- Glue and orchestrate operations, such as control the deploy process of multiple resources(e.g. your Applications), scale up/down, read-notify processes, or the sequence between http requests.
- Orchestrate delivery process without day-2 management, just deploy. The most common use case is to initialize your infrastructure for some environment.

### As an SDK

You can use KubeVela Workflow as an SDK to integrate it into your project. For example, the KubeVela Project use it to control the process of application delivery.

You just need to initialize a workflow instance and generate all the task runners with the instance, then execute the task runners. Please check out the example in [Workflow](https://github.com/kubevela/workflow/blob/main/controllers/workflowrun_controller.go#L101) or [KubeVela](https://github.com/kubevela/kubevela/blob/master/pkg/controller/core.oam.dev/v1alpha2/application/application_controller.go#L197).

## Contributing

Check out [CONTRIBUTING](https://kubevela.io/docs/contributor/overview) to see how to develop with KubeVela Workflow.

Commit message:

Signed-off-by: viskumar <viskumar@guidewire.com>
Chore: refactor definitions and add local dev support

- Refactored `apply-deployment`, `apply-object`, `clean-jobs`, `export2config`, and `export2secret` to use `vela/kube` and `vela/builtin` instead of `vela/op`.
- Updated CUE templates to use `$params` syntax.
- Added `custom.definition.oam.dev/category: Resource Management` annotation to definitions.
- Removed `custom.definition.oam.dev/ui-hidden` label from definitions.
- Added `core-install` and `def-install` targets to Makefile for local development.
- Added `DEFINITION_NAMESPACE` to `makefiles/const.mk`.
- Updated README.md with local development guide.

README.md, after:

# KubeVela Workflow

[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/kubevela/workflow)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/kubevela/workflow)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/kubevela/workflow/branch/main/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/kubevela/workflow)
[![LICENSE](https://img.shields.io/github/license/kubevela/workflow.svg?style=flat-square)](/LICENSE)
[![Total alerts](https://img.shields.io/lgtm/alerts/g/kubevela/workflow.svg?logo=lgtm&logoWidth=18)](https://lgtm.com/projects/g/kubevela/workflow/alerts/)


## What is KubeVela Workflow

KubeVela Workflow is an open-source cloud-native workflow project that can use to orchestrate CI/CD process, terraform resources, multi-kubernetes-clusters management and even your own functional calls.

You can [install](#installation) KubeVela Workflow and use it, or import the code as an [sdk](#how-can-kubevela-workflow-be-used) of an IaC-based workflow engine in your own repository.

*The main differences between KubeVela Workflow and other cloud-native workflows are*:

All the steps in the workflow is based on IaC(Cue): every step has a `type` for abstract and reuse, the `step-type` is programmed in [CUE](https://cuelang.org/) language and easy to customize. 

That is to say, **you can use atomic capabilities like a function call in every step, instead of just creating a pod.**

## Why use KubeVela Workflow

<h1 align="center"><a href="https://kubevela.io/docs/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun"><img src="https://static.kubevela.net/images/1.6/workflow-arch.png" alt="workflow arch" align="center" width="700px" /></a></h1>

🌬️ **Lightweight Workflow Engine**: KubeVela Workflow won't create a pod or job for process control. Instead, everything can be done in steps and there will be no redundant resource consumption.

✨ **Flexible, Extensible and Programmable**: Every step has a type, and all the types are based on the [CUE](https://cuelang.org/) language, which means if you want to customize a new step type, you just need to write CUE codes and no need to compile or build anything, KubeVela Workflow will evaluate these codes.

💪 **Rich built-in capabilities**: You can control the process with conditional judgement, inputs/outputs, timeout, etc. You can also use the built-in step types to do some common tasks, such as `deploy resources`, `suspend`, `notification`, `step-group` and more!

🔐 **Safe execution with schema checksum checking**: Every step will be checked with the schema, which means you can't run a step with a wrong parameter. This will ensure the safety of the workflow execution.

## Try KubeVela Workflow

Run your first WorkflowRun to distribute secrets, build and push your image, and apply the resources in the cluster! Image build can take some time, you can use `vela workflow logs build-push-image --step build-push` to check the logs of building.

```
apiVersion: core.oam.dev/v1alpha1
kind: WorkflowRun
metadata:
  name: build-push-image
  namespace: default
spec:
  workflowSpec:
   steps:
   # or use kubectl create secret generic git-token --from-literal='GIT_TOKEN=<your-token>'
    - name: create-git-secret
      type: export2secret
      properties:
        secretName: git-secret
        data:
          token: <git token>
    # or use kubectl create secret docker-registry docker-regcred \
    # --docker-server=https://index.docker.io/v1/ \
    # --docker-username=<your-username> \
    # --docker-password=<your-password> 
    - name: create-image-secret
      type: export2secret
      properties:
        secretName: image-secret
        kind: docker-registry
        dockerRegistry:
          username: <docker username>
          password: <docker password>
    - name: build-push
      type: build-push-image
      properties:
        # use your kaniko executor image like below, if not set, it will use default image oamdev/kaniko-executor:v1.9.1
        # kanikoExecutor: gcr.io/kaniko-project/executor:latest
        # you can use context with git and branch or directly specify the context, please refer to https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/kaniko#kaniko-build-contexts
        context:
          git: github.com/FogDong/simple-web-demo
          branch: main
        image: fogdong/simple-web-demo:v1
        # specify your dockerfile, if not set, it will use default dockerfile ./Dockerfile
        # dockerfile: ./Dockerfile
        credentials:
          image:
            name: image-secret
        # buildArgs:
        #   - key="value"
        # platform: linux/arm
    - name: apply-deploy
      type: apply-deployment
      properties:
        image: fogdong/simple-web-demo:v1
```

## Quick Start

After installation, you can either run a WorkflowRun directly or from a Workflow Template. Every step in the workflow should have a type and some parameters, in which defines how this step works. You can use the [built-in step type definitions](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/workflow/built-in-workflow-defs) or [write your own custom step types](#how-to-write-custom-steps).

> Please checkout the [WorkflowRun Specification](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#workflowrun) and [WorkflowRun Status](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#status) for more details.

### Run a WorkflowRun directly

For more, please refer to the following examples:

- [Control the delivery process of multiple resources(e.g. your Applications)](./examples/multiple-apps.md)
- [Request a specified URL and then use the response as a message to notify](./examples/request-and-notify.md)
- [Automatically initialize the environment with terraform](./examples/initialize-env.md)

### Run a WorkflowRun from a Workflow Template

Please refer to the following examples:

- [Run the Workflow Template with different context to control the process](./examples/run-with-template.md)

## Installation

### Install Workflow

#### Helm

```shell
helm repo add kubevela https://kubevela.github.io/charts
helm repo update
helm install --create-namespace -n vela-system vela-workflow kubevela/vela-workflow
```

#### KubeVela Addon

If you have installed KubeVela, you can install Workflow with the KubeVela Addon:

```shell
vela addon enable vela-workflow
```

### Install Vela CLI(Optional)

Please checkout: [Install Vela CLI](https://kubevela.io/docs/installation/kubernetes#install-vela-cli)

## Features

- [Operate WorkflowRun](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#operate-workflowrun)
- [Suspend and Resume](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#suspend-and-resume)
- [Sub Steps](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#sub-steps)
- [Dependency](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#dependency)
- [Data Passing](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#data-passing)
- [Timeout](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#timeout)
- [If Conditions](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#if-conditions)
- [Custom Context Data](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#custom-context-data)
- [Built-in Context Data](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/pipeline/workflowrun#built-in-context-data)

## Step Types

### Built-in Step Types

Please checkout the [built-in step definitions](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/end-user/workflow/built-in-workflow-defs) with scope that valid in `WorkflowRun`.
### Write Your Custom Step Types

If you're not familiar with CUE, please checkout the [CUE documentation](https://kubevela.io/docs/platform-engineers/cue/basic) first.

You can customize your steps with CUE and some [built-in operations](https://kubevela.io/docs/platform-engineers/workflow/cue-actions). Please checkout the [tutorial](https://kubevela.io/docs/platform-engineers/workflow/workflow) for more details.

> Note that you cannot use the [application operations](https://kubevela.io/docs/next/platform-engineers/workflow/cue-actions#application-operations) since there're no application data like components/traits/policy in the WorkflowRun.

## How can KubeVela Workflow be used

During the evolution of the [OAM](https://oam.dev/) and [KubeVela project](https://github.com/kubevela/kubevela), **workflow**, as an important part to control the delivery process, has gradually matured. Therefore, we separated the workflow code from the KubeVela repository to make it standalone. As a general workflow engine, it can be used directly or as an SDK by other projects.

### As a standalone workflow engine

Unlike the workflow in the KubeVela Application, this workflow will only be executed once, and will **not keep reconciliation**, **no garbage collection** when the workflow object deleted or updated. You can use it for **one-time** operations like:

- Glue and orchestrate operations, such as control the deploy process of multiple resources(e.g. your Applications), scale up/down, read-notify processes, or the sequence between http requests.
- Orchestrate delivery process without day-2 management, just deploy. The most common use case is to initialize your infrastructure for some environment.

### As an SDK

You can use KubeVela Workflow as an SDK to integrate it into your project. For example, the KubeVela Project use it to control the process of application delivery.

You just need to initialize a workflow instance and generate all the task runners with the instance, then execute the task runners. Please check out the example in [Workflow](https://github.com/kubevela/workflow/blob/main/controllers/workflowrun_controller.go#L101) or [KubeVela](https://github.com/kubevela/kubevela/blob/master/pkg/controller/core.oam.dev/v1alpha2/application/application_controller.go#L197).

## Local Development

If you want to run the workflow controller locally in your IDE for development:

1. Install CRDs and create namespace: `make core-install`
2. Install built-in workflow step definitions: `make def-install`
3. Run the controller: `make run`

For detailed setup instructions, see [Local Development Guide](./docs/local-development.md).

## Contributing

Check out [CONTRIBUTING](https://kubevela.io/docs/contributor/overview) to see how to develop with KubeVela Workflow.
